source_location (#192)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2023/2023-12-04-find-definitions-of-rails-methods-using-source_location.md

---
title: "Find definitions of Rails methods using source_location and bundle open"
description: "Show me where the magic comes from."
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2023/find-definitions-of-rails-methods-using-source_location"
  alt: "Landsat maps in black and white"
  credit: "USGS"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/white-and-black-abstract-painting-PuLsDCBbyBM"

---  

Given it's a dynamic language, it's important that Ruby comes with several excellent debugging and introspection features out of the box.

> Finding the exact place a method or block of code is defined and being able to read the related source code is essential for effective debugging and code comprehension. In Ruby, the `source_location` method, provides a powerful tool for retrieving the file and line number for where a particular method or block is defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finding the exact place a method or block of code is defined, and being able to read the related source code, is essential for effective debugging and code comprehension. In Ruby, the `source_location` method provides a powerful tool for retrieving the file and line number for where a particular method or block is defined.
```

## Explore Rails using…

...the `#source_location` method.

```ruby
"Cars".method(:singularize).source_location
#=> ["/.../activesupport-7.0.8/lib/active_support/core_ext/string/inflections.rb", 60]
```

Then open from the command line:

```shell
bundle open activesupport
```

> ...which opens the source code of the gem in your editor of choice for you to explore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
...which opens the source code of the gem in your editor of choice.
```

```ruby
class Car < ApplicationRecord
  has_many :seats

  # ...
end

Car.first.method(:seats).source_location
#=> [".../activerecord-7.0.8/lib/active_record/associations/builder/association.rb", 103]
```

Then open from the command line:

```shell
bundle open activerecord
```

## Why not?

While you're experimenting, you might find `source_location` doesn't always provide a helpful result. Methods included as part of "core" Ruby are often implemented in C, and their definitions are not directly accessible from Ruby code. Therefore, calling `source_location` on a core method will typically return `nil`.

```ruby
"Cars".method(:upcase).source_location
#=> nil
```

It also won't work for methods that use a C extension (where Ruby code calls out to C). `source_location` only works for methods defined in gems where the source code is in Ruby. 

> Also, while `source_location` can be invaluable during development and debugging, don't accidentally include in production code!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And while `source_location` can be invaluable during development and debugging, don't accidentally include it in production code!
```

Reviewer: Much better way of stating this!!

---
title: "Find definitions of Rails methods using source_location and bundle open"
description: "Show me where the magic comes from."
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2023/find-definitions-of-rails-methods-using-source_location"
  alt: "Landsat maps in black and white"
  credit: "USGS"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/white-and-black-abstract-painting-PuLsDCBbyBM"

---  

> As a dynamic language it's important that Ruby provides many excellent debugging and introspection features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given it's a dynamic language, it's important that Ruby comes with several excellent debugging and introspection features out of the box.
```

> Finding the place a method or block of code is defined and reading its source code is essential for effective debugging and code comprehension. In Ruby, `source_location`, provides a powerful tool for retrieving the file and line number where a particular method or block is defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finding the exact place a method or block of code is defined and being able to read the related source code is essential for effective debugging and code comprehension. In Ruby, the `source_location` method, provides a powerful tool for retrieving the file and line number where a particular method or block is defined.
```

> Finding the exact place a method or block of code is defined and being able to read the related source code is essential for effective debugging and code comprehension. In Ruby, the `source_location` method, provides a powerful tool for retrieving the file and line number where a particular method or block is defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finding the exact place a method or block of code is defined and being able to read the related source code is essential for effective debugging and code comprehension. In Ruby, the `source_location` method, provides a powerful tool for retrieving the file and line number for where a particular method or block is defined.
```

## Explore Rails using…

...the `#source_location` method.

```ruby
"Cars".method(:singularize).source_location
#=> ["/.../activesupport-7.0.8/lib/active_support/core_ext/string/inflections.rb", 60]
```

Then open from the command line:

```shell
bundle open activesupport
```

> Which opens the named gem in your editor of choice for you to explore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
...which opens the named gem in your editor of choice for you to explore.
```

## Why?

> Use of `source_location` is invaluable when you're new to a application, re-exploring unfamiliar code or  trying to understand which gem is providing functionality you're using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use of `source_location` is invaluable when you're new to an application, re-exploring unfamiliar code, or  trying to understand which gem is providing the functionality you're using.
```

> Use of `source_location` is invaluable when you're new to an application, re-exploring unfamiliar code, or  trying to understand which gem is providing the functionality you're using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use of `source_location` is invaluable when you're new to an application, re-exploring unfamiliar code, or trying to understand which gem is providing the functionality you're using.
```

> Reading source code is a great way to learn. Reading battle-tested code like Rails, or other gems, even more so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reading source code is a great way to learn. Reading battle-tested code like that of Rails itself, or other gems, even more so.
```

> Thanks to authors of the framework it even works for some of the meta-programmed "generated methods" in Rails. Methods on Active Record [associations that are generated](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activerecord/lib/active_record/associations/builder/association.rb#L103) using `class_eval` pass special syntax to enable the `source_location` lookup to still work (or you'd just see `(eval)` as the first result.

Reviewer: Should the hyperlink include the 'class_eval' part?

Reviewer: I think this paragraph is a little jumbled, especially towards the end?

Author: ```suggestion
Thanks to authors of the framework `source_location` works for "magic" meta-programmed methods in Rails. Methods on Active Record [associations that are generated using `class_eval`](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activerecord/lib/active_record/associations/builder/association.rb#L103) pass special syntax to enable the lookup to still work. If it weren't for this when you called `source_location` you'd just see `(eval)` as the first result.
```

> Thanks to authors of the framework `source_location` works for "magic" meta-programmed methods in Rails. Methods on Active Record [associations that are generated using `class_eval`](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activerecord/lib/active_record/associations/builder/association.rb#L103) pass special syntax to enable the lookup to still work. If it weren't for this when you called `source_location` you'd just see `(eval)` as the first result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the authors of the framework, `source_location` also works for "magic" meta-programmed methods in Rails. Methods on Active Record [associations that are generated using `class_eval`](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activerecord/lib/active_record/associations/builder/association.rb#L103) pass special syntax to enable the lookup to still work. If it weren't for this, when you called `source_location` on these methods, you'd always just see `(eval)` as the first result.
```

```ruby
class Car < ApplicationRecord
  has_many :seats

  # ...
end

Car.first.method(:seats).source_location
#=> [".../activerecord-7.0.8/lib/active_record/associations/builder/association.rb", 103]
```

> Then open from the command line:

Reviewer: Do you need to show this part of the second example?

Author: I think so. Folks don't know how to open gem source code.

```shell
bundle open activerecord
```

## Why not?

> If you experiment you might find that this doesn't work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While you're experimenting, you might find that this doesn't always work.
```

> While you're experimenting, you might find that this doesn't always work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While you're experimenting, you might find that this method doesn't always provide a helpful result.
```

```ruby
"Cars".method(:upcase).source_location
#=> nil
```

> Methods included as part of "core" Ruby are often implemented in C, and their definitions are not directly accessible from Ruby code. Therefore, calling `source_location` on a core method will typically return `nil`.

Reviewer: Maybe this is better as the first paragraph of this section, then the example.

Author: Done.

> The `source_location` method only works for methods defined in Ruby or in Ruby gems where the source code is available. You might also have trouble if the method in question is defined in a C extension, or even when if you do get to the source code, it'll just be a call out to C code!

Reviewer: Ending here seems a little jumbled too!

Author: ```suggestion
The `source_location` method only works for methods defined in gems where the source code is in Ruby. It won't work for methods that use a C extension (where Ruby code calls out to C).
```

> The `source_location` method only works for methods defined in gems where the source code is in Ruby. It won't work for methods that use a C extension (where Ruby code calls out to C).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also won't work for methods that use a C extension (where Ruby code calls out to C). `source_location` only works for methods defined in gems where the source code is in Ruby. 
```

> Also while `source_location` can be invaluable during development and debugging, it's not generally suitable for regular use in production code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, while `source_location` can be invaluable during development and debugging, it's not generally suitable for regular use in production code. 
```

> Also, while `source_location` can be invaluable during development and debugging, it's not generally suitable for regular use in production code. 

Reviewer: When would someone even think to include this in their production code though?

Author: By accident. Seen it done!

Author: ```suggestion
Also, while `source_location` can be invaluable during development and debugging, don't accidentally include in production code!
```
